<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1–17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Rivals</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Michael was in comparative safety, though his situation was still terrible.</p>
			<p>Now that the faithful animal who had so bravely borne him had met his death in the waters of the river, how was he to continue his journey?</p>
			<p>He was on foot, without provisions, in a country devastated by the invasion, overrun by the Emir’s scouts, and still at a considerable distance from the place he was striving to reach.</p>
			<p>“By Heaven, I will get there!” he exclaimed, in reply to all the reasons for faltering. “God will protect our sacred Russia.”</p>
			<p>Michael was out of reach of the Uzbek horsemen. They had not dared to pursue him through the river, and must besides have thought he was drowned, for after his disappearance beneath the water hey had seen nothing more of him.</p>
			<p>But Michael, creeping up among the gigantic rushes, had reached a higher part of the bank, though not without difficulty, for the thick mud deposited by the overflowing of the water made it slippery in the extreme.</p>
			<p>Once more on solid ground Michael stopped to consider what he should do next. He wished to avoid Tomsk, now occupied by the Tartar troops. Nevertheless, he must reach some town, or at least a post-house, where he could procure a horse. A horse once found, he would throw himself out of the beaten track, and not again take to the <span xml:lang="ru">Irkutsk</span> road until in the neighborhood of <span xml:lang="ru">Krasnoyarsk</span>. From that place, if he were quick, he hoped to find the way still open, and he intended to go through the Lake Baikal provinces in a southeasterly direction.</p>
			<p>Michael began by going eastward.</p>
			<p>By following the course of the Obi two versts further, he reached a picturesque little town lying on a small hill. A few churches, with Byzantine cupolas colored green and gold, stood up against the gray sky.</p>
			<p>This is Kolyvan, where the officers and people employed at Kamsk and other towns take refuge during the summer from the unhealthy climate of the Baraba. According to the latest news obtained by the Czar’s courier, Kolyvan could not be yet in the hands of the invaders. The Tartar troops, divided into two columns, had marched to the left on <span xml:lang="ru">Omsk</span>, to the right on Tomsk, neglecting the intermediate country.</p>
			<p>Michael Strogoff’s plan was simply this—to reach Kolyvan before the arrival of the Uzbek horsemen, who would ascend the left bank of the Obi. There, even if he had to pay ten times more than they were worth, he would procure clothes and a horse, and resume the road to <span xml:lang="ru">Irkutsk</span> across the southern steppe.</p>
			<p>It was now three o’clock in the morning. The neighborhood of Kolyvan was very still, and appeared to have been totally abandoned. The country population had evidently fled to the northwards, to the province of <span xml:lang="ru">Yeniseysk</span>, dreading the invasion, which they could not resist.</p>
			<p>Michael was walking at a rapid pace towards Kolyvan when distant firing struck his ear. He stopped, and clearly distinguished the dull roar of artillery, and above it a crisp rattle which could not be mistaken.</p>
			<p>“It is cannon and musketry!” said he. “The little Russian body is engaged with the Tartar army! Pray Heaven that I may arrive at Kolyvan before them!”</p>
			<p>Michael was not mistaken. The firing became gradually louder, and soon to the left of Kolyvan a mist collected—not smoke, but those great white clouds produced by discharges of artillery.</p>
			<p>The Uzbeks horsemen stopped on the left of the Obi, to await the result of the battle.</p>
			<p>On this side Michael had nothing to fear as he hastened towards the town.</p>
			<p>In the meanwhile the firing increased, and became sensibly nearer. It was no longer a confused roar, but distinct reports. At the same time the smoke partially cleared, and it became evident that the combatants were rapidly moving southwards. It appeared that Kolyvan was to be attacked on the north side. But were the Russians defending it against the Tartar troops, and would they endeavor to retake it from the soldiers of Feofar-Khan? It being impossible to decide this, Michael became greatly perplexed.</p>
			<p>He was not more than half a verst from Kolyvan when he observed flames shooting up among the houses of the town, and the steeple of a church fell in the midst of clouds of smoke and fire.</p>
			<p>Was the struggle, then, in Kolyvan? Michael was compelled to think so. It was evident that Russians and Tartars were fighting in the streets of the town. Was this a time to seek refuge there? Would he not run a risk of being taken prisoner? Should he succeed in escaping from Kolyvan, as he had escaped from <span xml:lang="ru">Omsk</span>? All these contingencies presented themselves to his mind. He hesitated and stopped a moment. Would it not be better to try, even on foot, to reach some small town, and there procure a horse at any price? This was the only thing to be done; and Michael, leaving the banks of the Obi, went forward to the right of Kolyvan.</p>
			<p>The firing had now increased in violence. Flames soon sprang up on the left of the town. Fire was devouring one entire quarter of Kolyvan.</p>
			<p>Michael was running across on across the steppe endeavoring to gain the covert of some trees when a detachment of Tartar cavalry appeared on the right.</p>
			<p> He dared not continue in that direction. The horsemen advanced rapidly, and it would have been difficult to escape them.</p>
			<p>Suddenly, in a thick clump of trees, he saw an isolated house, which it would be possible to reach before he was perceived.</p>
			<p>Michael had no choice but to run there, hide himself and ask or take something to recruit his strength, for he was exhausted with hunger and fatigue.</p>
			<p>He accordingly ran on towards this house, still about half a verst distant. As he approached, he could see that it was a telegraph office. Two wires left it in westerly and easterly directions, and a third went towards Kolyvan.</p>
			<p>It was to be supposed that under the circumstances this station was abandoned; but even if it was, Michael could take refuge there, and wait till nightfall, if necessary, to again set out across the steppe covered with Tartar scouts.</p>
			<p>Michael ran up to the door and pushed it open.</p>
			<p>A single person was in the room whence the telegraphic messages were dispatched.</p>
			<p>This was a clerk, calm, phlegmatic, indifferent to all that was passing outside. Faithful to his post, he waited behind his little wicket until the public claimed his services.</p>
			<p>Michael ran up to him, and in a voice broken by fatigue, “What do you know?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” answered the clerk, smiling.</p>
			<p>“Are the Russians and Tartars engaged?”</p>
			<p>“They say so.”</p>
			<p>“But who are the victors?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>Such calmness, such indifference, in the midst of these terrible events, was scarcely credible.</p>
			<p>“And is not the wire cut?” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“It is cut between Kolyvan and <span xml:lang="ru">Krasnoyarsk</span>, but it is still working between Kolyvan and the Russian frontier.”</p>
			<p>“For the government?”</p>
			<p>“For the government, when it thinks proper. For the public, when they pay. Ten kopecks a word, whenever you like, sir!”</p>
			<p>Michael was about to reply to this strange clerk that he had no message to send, that he only implored a little bread and water, when the door of the house was again thrown open.</p>
			<p>Thinking that it was invaded by Tartars, Michael made ready to leap out of the window, when two men only entered the room who had nothing of the Tartar soldier about them.</p>
			<p>One of them held a dispatch, written in pencil, in his hand, and, passing the other, he hurried up to the wicket of the imperturbable clerk.</p>
			<p>In these two men Michael recognized with astonishment, which everyone will understand, two personages of whom he was not thinking at all, and whom he had never expected to see again.</p>
			<p>They were the two reporters, Harry Blount and <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span>, no longer traveling companions, but rivals, enemies, now that they were working on the field of battle.</p>
			<p>They had left Ishim only a few hours after the departure of Michael Strogoff, and they had arrived at Kolyvan before him, by following the same road, in consequence of his losing three days on the banks of the <span xml:lang="ru">Irtysh</span>.</p>
			<p>And now, after being both present at the engagement between the Russians and Tartars before the town, they had left just as the struggle broke out in the streets, and ran to the telegraph office, so as to send off their rival dispatches to Europe, and forestall each other in their report of events.</p>
			<p>Michael stood aside in the shadow, and without being seen himself he could see and hear all that was going on. He would now hear interesting news, and would find out whether or not he could enter Kolyvan.</p>
			<p>Blount, having distanced his companion, took possession of the wicket, whilst <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span>, contrary to his usual habit, stamped with impatience.</p>
			<p>“Ten kopecks a word,” said the clerk.</p>
			<p>Blount deposited a pile of roubles on the shelf, whilst his rival looked on with a sort of stupefaction.</p>
			<p>“Good,” said the clerk.</p>
			<p>And with the greatest coolness in the world he began to telegraph the following dispatch: </p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Telegraph</i>, London.</p>
				<p>“From Kolyvan, Government of <span xml:lang="ru">Omsk</span>, Siberia, 6th August.</p>
				<p>“Engagement between Russian and Tartar troops.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The reading was in a distinct voice, so that Michael heard all that the English correspondent was sending to his paper.</p>
			<p>“Russians repulsed with great loss. Tartars entered Kolyvan today.”</p>
			<p>These words ended the dispatch.</p>
			<p>“My turn now,” cried <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span>, anxious to send off his dispatch, addressed to his cousin in the <span xml:lang="fr">Faubourg Montmartre</span>.</p>
			<p>But that was not Blount’s idea, who did not intend to give up the wicket, but have it in his power to send off the news just as the events occurred. He would therefore not make way for his companion.</p>
			<p>“But you have finished!” exclaimed <span xml:lang="fr">Jolivet</span>.</p>
			<p>“I have not finished,” returned Harry Blount quietly.</p>
			<p>And he proceeded to write some sentences, which he handed in to the clerk, who read out in his calm voice—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“John Gilpin was a citizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">of credit and renown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a train-band captain eke was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">of famous London town.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Harry Blount was telegraphing some verses learned in his childhood, in order to employ the time, and not give up his place to his rival. It would perhaps cost his paper some thousands of roubles, but it would be the first informed. France could wait.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Jolivet’s</span> fury may be imagined, though under any other circumstances he would have thought it fair warfare. He even endeavored to force the clerk to take his dispatch in preference to that of his rival.</p>
			<p>“It is that gentleman’s right,” answered the clerk coolly, pointing to Blount, and smiling in the most amiable manner.</p>
			<p>And he continued faithfully to transmit to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Telegraph</i> the well-known verses of Cowper.</p>
			<p>Whilst he was working Blount walked to the window and, his field glass to his eyes, watched all that was going on in the neighborhood of Kolyvan, so as to complete his information.</p>
			<p>In a few minutes he resumed his place at the wicket, and added to his telegram—</p>
			<p>“Two churches are in flames. The fire appears to gain on the right.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‘John Gilpin’s spouse said to her dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Though wedded we have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>these twice ten tedious years, yet we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">no holiday have seen.”’”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span> would have liked to strangle the honorable correspondent of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Telegraph</i>.</p>
			<p>He again interrupted the clerk, who, quite unmoved, merely replied—</p>
			<p>“It is his right, sir, it is his right—at ten kopecks a word.”</p>
			<p>And he telegraphed the following news, just brought him by Blount—</p>
			<p>“Russian fugitives are escaping from the town.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‘Away went Gilpin—who but he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His fame soon spread around:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He carries weight! he rides a race!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis for a thousand pound!”’”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And Blount turned round with a quizzical look at his rival.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span> fumed.</p>
			<p>In the meanwhile Harry Blount had returned to the window, but this time, his attention was diverted by the interest of the scene before him, he prolonged his absence too long. Therefore, when the clerk had finished telegraphing the last lines dictated by Blount, <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span> noiselessly took his place at the wicket, and, just as his rival had done, after quietly depositing a respectable pile of roubles on the shelf, he delivered his dispatch, which the clerk read aloud—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“<span xml:lang="fr">Madeleine Jolivet</span>, 10, <span xml:lang="fr">Faubourg Montmartre</span>, Paris.</p>
				<p>“From Kolyvan, Government of <span xml:lang="ru">Omsk</span>, Siberia, 6th August.</p>
				<p>“Fugitives are escaping from the town. Russians defeated. Fiercely pursued by the Tartar cavalry.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And as Harry Blount returned he heard <span xml:lang="fr">Jolivet</span> completing his telegram by singing in a mocking tone—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="fr">
				<p>
					<span>“Il est un petit homme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tout habillé de gris,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dans Paris!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Imitating his rival, <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span> had used a merry refrain of <span xml:lang="fr">Béranger</span>.</p>
			<p>“Hallo!” said Harry Blount.</p>
			<p>“Just so,” answered <span xml:lang="fr">Jolivet</span>.</p>
			<p>In the meantime the situation at Kolyvan was alarming in the extreme. The battle was raging nearer, and the firing was incessant.</p>
			<p>At that moment the telegraph-house shook to its foundations.</p>
			<p>A shell had made a hole in the wall, and a cloud of dust filled the office.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Alcide</span> was just finishing writing his lines—</p>
			<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
				<p>“Joufflu comme une pomme,</p>
				<p>Qui, sans un sou comptant—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>But to stop, dart on the shell, seize it in both hands, throw it out of the window, and return to the wicket, was only the affair of a moment.</p>
			<p>Five seconds later the shell burst outside.</p>
			<p>But continuing with the greatest possible coolness, <span xml:lang="fr">Alcide</span> wrote—</p>
			<p>“A six-inch shell has just blown up the wall of the telegraph office. Expecting a few more of the same size.”</p>
			<p>Michael Strogoff had no doubt that the Russians were driven out of Kolyvan. His last resource was to set out across the southern steppe.</p>
			<p>Just then renewed firing broke out close to the telegraph-house, and a perfect shower of bullets smashed all the glass in the windows.</p>
			<p>Harry Blount fell to the ground wounded in the shoulder.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Jolivet</span> even at such a moment, was about to add this postscript to his dispatch—</p>
			<p>“Harry Blount, correspondent of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Telegraph</i>, has fallen at my side struck by a shot from a volley of—” when the imperturbable clerk said calmly—</p>
			<p>“Sir, the wire has broken.”</p>
			<p>And, leaving his wicket, he quietly took his hat, brushed it round with his sleeve, and, still smiling, disappeared through a little door which Michael had not before perceived.</p>
			<p>The house was surrounded by Tartar soldiers, and neither Michael nor the reporters could effect their retreat.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="fr">Alcide Jolivet</span>, his useless dispatch in his hand, had run to Blount, stretched on the ground, and had bravely lifted him on his shoulders, with the intention of flying with him. He was too late!</p>
			<p>Both were prisoners; and, at the same time, Michael, taken unawares as he was about to leap from the window, fell into the hands of the Tartars!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
