<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
  CHAPTER XIII THE CZAR’S COURIER
</h2>
<p>
  ALL the members of the council simultaneously started forward. A courier
  from the Czar arrived in Irkutsk! Had these officers for a moment
  considered the improbability of this fact, they would certainly not have
  credited what they heard.
</p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke advanced quickly to his aide-de-camp. “This courier!” he
  exclaimed.
</p>
<p>
  A man entered. He appeared exhausted with fatigue. He wore the dress of a
  Siberian peasant, worn into tatters, and exhibiting several shot-holes. A
  Muscovite cap was on his head. His face was disfigured by a
  recently-healed scar. The man had evidently had a long and painful
  journey; his shoes being in a state which showed that he had been obliged
  to make part of it on foot.
</p>
<p>
  “His Highness the Grand Duke?” he asked.
</p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke went up to him. “You are a courier from the Czar?” he
  asked.
</p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness.”
 </p>
<p>
  “You come?”
 </p>
<p>
  “From Moscow.”
 </p>
<p>
  “You left Moscow?”
 </p>
<p>
  “On the 15th of July.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Your name?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Michael Strogoff.”
 </p>
<p>
  It was Ivan Ogareff. He had taken the designation of the man whom he
  believed that he had rendered powerless. Neither the Grand Duke nor anyone
  knew him in Irkutsk, and he had not even to disguise his features. As he
  was in a position to prove his pretended identity, no one could have any
  reason for doubting him. He came, therefore, sustained by his iron will,
  to hasten by treason and assassination the great object of the invasion.
</p>
<p>
  After Ogareff had replied, the Grand Duke signed to all his officers to
  withdraw. He and the false Michael Strogoff remained alone in the saloon.
</p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke looked at Ivan Ogareff for some moments with extreme
  attention. Then he said, “On the 15th of July you were at Moscow?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness; and on the night of the 14th I saw His Majesty the
  Czar at the New Palace.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Have you a letter from the Czar?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Here it is.”
 </p>
<p>
  And Ivan Ogareff handed to the Grand Duke the Imperial letter, crumpled to
  almost microscopic size.
</p>
<p>
  “Was the letter given you in this state?”
 </p>
<p>
  “No, your Highness, but I was obliged to tear the envelope, the better to
  hide it from the Emir’s soldiers.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Were you taken prisoner by the Tartars?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness, I was their prisoner for several days,” answered
  Ogareff. “That is the reason that, having left Moscow on the 15th of July,
  as the date of that letter shows, I only reached Irkutsk on the 2d of
  October, after traveling seventy-nine days.”
 </p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke took the letter. He unfolded it and recognized the Czar’s
  signature, preceded by the decisive formula, written by his brother’s
  hand. There was no possible doubt of the authenticity of this letter, nor
  of the identity of the courier. Though Ogareff’s countenance had at first
  inspired the Grand Duke with some distrust, he let nothing of it appear,
  and it soon vanished.
</p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke remained for a few minutes without speaking. He read the
  letter slowly, so as to take in its meaning fully. “Michael Strogoff, do
  you know the contents of this letter?” he asked.
</p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness. I might have been obliged to destroy it, to prevent
  its falling into the hands of the Tartars, and should such have been the
  case, I wished to be able to bring the contents of it to your Highness.”
 </p>
<p>
  “You know that this letter enjoins us all to die, rather than give up the
  town?”
 </p>
<p>
  “I know it.”
 </p>
<p>
  “You know also that it informs me of the movements of the troops which
  have combined to stop the invasion?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness, but the movements have failed.”
 </p>
<p>
  “What do you mean?”
 </p>
<p>
  “I mean that Ichim, Omsk, Tomsk, to speak only of the more important towns
  of the two Siberias, have been successively occupied by the soldiers of
  Feofar-Khan.”
 </p>
<p>
  “But there has been fighting? Have not our Cossacks met the Tartars?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Several times, your Highness.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And they were repulsed?”
 </p>
<p>
  “They were not in sufficient force to oppose the enemy.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Where did the encounters take place?”
 </p>
<p>
  “At Kolyvan, at Tomsk.” Until now, Ogareff had only spoken the truth, but,
  in the hope of troubling the defenders of Irkutsk by exaggerating the
  defeats, he added, “And a third time before Krasnoiarsk.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And what of this last engagement?” asked the Grand Duke, through whose
  compressed lips the words could scarcely pass.
</p>
<p>
  “It was more than an engagement, your Highness,” answered Ogareff; “it was
  a battle.”
 </p>
<p>
  “A battle?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Twenty thousand Russians, from the frontier provinces and the government
  of Tobolsk, engaged with a hundred and fifty thousand Tartars, and,
  notwithstanding their courage, were overwhelmed.”
 </p>
<p>
  “You lie!” exclaimed the Grand Duke, endeavoring in vain to curb his
  passion.
</p>
<p>
  “I speak the truth, your Highness,” replied Ivan Ogareff coldly. “I was
  present at the battle of Krasnoiarsk, and it was there I was made
  prisoner!”
 </p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke grew calmer, and by a significant gesture he gave Ogareff
  to understand that he did not doubt his veracity. “What day did this
  battle of Krasnoiarsk take place?” he asked.
</p>
<p>
  “On the 2d of September.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And now all the Tartar troops are concentrated here?”
 </p>
<p>
  “All.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And you estimate them?”
 </p>
<p>
  “At about four hundred thousand men.”
 </p>
<p>
  Another exaggeration of Ogareff’s in the estimate of the Tartar army, with
  the same object as before.
</p>
<p>
  “And I must not expect any help from the West provinces?” asked the Grand
  Duke.
</p>
<p>
  “None, your Highness, at any rate before the end of the winter.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Well, hear this, Michael Strogoff. Though I must expect no help either
  from the East or from the West, even were these barbarians six hundred
  thousand strong, I will never give up Irkutsk!”
 </p>
<p>
  Ogareff’s evil eye slightly contracted. The traitor thought to himself
  that the brother of the Czar did not reckon the result of treason.
</p>
<p>
  The Grand Duke, who was of a nervous temperament, had great difficulty in
  keeping calm whilst hearing this disastrous news. He walked to and fro in
  the room, under the gaze of Ogareff, who eyed him as a victim reserved for
  vengeance. He stopped at the windows, he looked forth at the fires in the
  Tartar camp, he listened to the noise of the ice-blocks drifting down the
  Angara.
</p>
<p>
  A quarter of an hour passed without his putting any more questions. Then
  taking up the letter, he re-read a passage and said, “You know that in
  this letter I am warned of a traitor, of whom I must beware?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness.”
 </p>
<p>
  “He will try to enter Irkutsk in disguise; gain my confidence, and betray
  the town to the Tartars.”
 </p>
<p>
  “I know all that, your Highness, and I know also that Ivan Ogareff has
  sworn to revenge himself personally on the Czar’s brother.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Why?”
 </p>
<p>
  “It is said that the officer in question was condemned by the Grand Duke
  to a humiliating degradation.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, I remember. But it is a proof that the villain, who could afterwards
  serve against his country and head an invasion of barbarians, deserved
  it.”
 </p>
<p>
  “His Majesty the Czar,” said Ogareff, “was particularly anxious that you
  should be warned of the criminal projects of Ivan Ogareff against your
  person.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes; of that the letter informs me.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And His Majesty himself spoke to me of it, telling me I was above all
  things to beware of the traitor.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Did you meet with him?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, your Highness, after the battle of Krasnoiarsk. If he had only
  guessed that I was the bearer of a letter addressed to your Highness, in
  which his plans were revealed, I should not have got off so easily.”
 </p>
<p>
  “No; you would have been lost!” replied the Grand Duke. “And how did you
  manage to escape?”
 </p>
<p>
  “By throwing myself into the Irtych.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And how did you enter Irkutsk?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Under cover of a sortie, which was made this evening to repulse a Tartar
  detachment. I mingled with the defenders of the town, made myself known,
  and was immediately conducted before your Highness.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Good, Michael Strogoff,” answered the Grand Duke. “You have shown courage
  and zeal in your difficult mission. I will not forget you. Have you any
  favor to ask?”
 </p>
<p>
  “None; unless it is to be allowed to fight at the side of your Highness,”
   replied Ogareff.
</p>
<p>
  “So be it, Strogoff. I attach you from to-day to my person, and you shall
  be lodged in the palace.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And if according to his intention, Ivan Ogareff should present himself to
  your Highness under a false name?”
 </p>
<p>
  “We will unmask him, thanks to you, who know him, and I will make him die
  under the knout. Go!”
 </p>
<p>
  Ogareff gave a military salute, not forgetting that he was a captain of
  the couriers of the Czar, and retired.
</p>
<p>
  Ogareff had so far played his unworthy part with success. The Grand Duke’s
  entire confidence had been accorded him. He could now betray it whenever
  it suited him. He would inhabit the very palace. He would be in the secret
  of all the operations for the defense of the town. He thus held the
  situation in his hand, as it were. No one in Irkutsk knew him, no one
  could snatch off his mask. He resolved therefore to set to work without
  delay.
</p>
<p>
  Indeed, time pressed. The town must be captured before the arrival of the
  Russians from the North and East, and that was only a question of a few
  days. The Tartars once masters of Irkutsk, it would not be easy to take it
  again from them. At any rate, even if they were obliged to abandon it
  later, they would not do so before they had utterly destroyed it, and
  before the head of the Grand Duke had rolled at the feet of Feofar-Khan.
</p>
<p>
  Ivan Ogareff, having every facility for seeing, observing, and acting,
  occupied himself the next day with visiting the ramparts. He was
  everywhere received with cordial congratulations from officers, soldiers,
  and citizens. To them this courier from the Czar was a link which
  connected them with the empire.
</p>
<p>
  Ogareff recounted, with an assurance which never failed, numerous
  fictitious events of his journey. Then, with the cunning for which he was
  noted, without dwelling too much on it at first, he spoke of the gravity
  of the situation, exaggerating the success of the Tartars and the numbers
  of the barbarian forces, as he had when speaking to the Grand Duke.
  According to him, the expected succors would be insufficient, if ever they
  arrived at all, and it was to be feared that a battle fought under the
  walls of Irkutsk would be as fatal as the battles of Kolyvan, Tomsk, and
  Krasnoiarsk.
</p>
<p>
  Ogareff was not too free in these insinuations. He wished to allow them to
  sink gradually into the minds of the defenders of Irkutsk. He pretended
  only to answer with reluctance when much pressed with questions. He always
  added that they must fight to the last man, and blow up the town rather
  than yield!
</p>
<p>
  These false statements would have done more harm had it been possible; but
  the garrison and the population of Irkutsk were too patriotic to let
  themselves be moved. Of all the soldiers and citizens shut up in this
  town, isolated at the extremity of the Asiatic world, not one dreamed of
  even speaking of a capitulation. The contempt of the Russians for these
  barbarians was boundless.
</p>
<p>
  No one suspected the odious part played by Ivan Ogareff; no one guessed
  that the pretended courier of the Czar was a traitor. It occurred very
  naturally that on his arrival in Irkutsk, a frequent intercourse was
  established between Ogareff and one of the bravest defenders of the town,
  Wassili Fedor. We know what anxiety this unhappy father suffered. If his
  daughter, Nadia Fedor, had left Russia on the date fixed by the last
  letter he had received from Riga, what had become of her? Was she still
  trying to cross the invaded provinces, or had she long since been taken
  prisoner? The only alleviation to Wassili Fedor’s anxiety was when he
  could obtain an opportunity of engaging in battle with the Tartars—opportunities
  which came too seldom for his taste. The very evening the pretended
  courier arrived, Wassili Fedor went to the governor-general’s palace and,
  acquainting Ogareff with the circumstances under which his daughter must
  have left European Russia, told him all his uneasiness about her. Ogareff
  did not know Nadia, although he had met her at Ichim on the day she was
  there with Michael Strogoff; but then, he had not paid more attention to
  her than to the two reporters, who at the same time were in the
  post-house; he therefore could give Wassili Fedor no news of his daughter.
</p>
<p>
  “But at what time,” asked Ogareff, “must your daughter have left the
  Russian territory?”
 </p>
<p>
  “About the same time that you did,” replied Fedor.
</p>
<p>
  “I left Moscow on the 15th of July.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Nadia must also have quitted Moscow at that time. Her letter told me so
  expressly.”
 </p>
<p>
  “She was in Moscow on the 15th of July?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes, certainly, by that date.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Then it was impossible for her—But no, I am mistaken—I was
  confusing dates. Unfortunately, it is too probable that your daughter must
  have passed the frontier, and you can only have one hope, that she stopped
  on learning the news of the Tartar invasion!”
 </p>
<p>
  The father’s head fell! He knew Nadia, and he knew too well that nothing
  would have prevented her from setting out. Ivan Ogareff had just committed
  gratuitously an act of real cruelty. With a word he might have reassured
  Fedor. Although Nadia had passed the frontier under circumstances with
  which we are acquainted, Fedor, by comparing the date on which his
  daughter would have been at Nijni-Novgorod, and the date of the
  proclamation which forbade anyone to leave it, would no doubt have
  concluded thus: that Nadia had not been exposed to the dangers of the
  invasion, and that she was still, in spite of herself, in the European
  territory of the Empire.
</p>
<p>
  Ogareff obedient to his nature, a man who was never touched by the
  sufferings of others, might have said that word. He did not say it. Fedor
  retired with his heart broken. In that interview his last hope was
  crushed.
</p>
<p>
  During the two following days, the 3rd and 4th of October, the Grand Duke
  often spoke to the pretended Michael Strogoff, and made him repeat all
  that he had heard in the Imperial Cabinet of the New Palace. Ogareff,
  prepared for all these questions, replied without the least hesitation. He
  intentionally did not conceal that the Czar’s government had been utterly
  surprised by the invasion, that the insurrection had been prepared in the
  greatest possible secrecy, that the Tartars were already masters of the
  line of the Obi when the news reached Moscow, and lastly, that none of the
  necessary preparations were completed in the Russian provinces for sending
  into Siberia the troops requisite for repulsing the invaders.
</p>
<p>
  Ivan Ogareff, being entirely free in his movements, began to study
  Irkutsk, the state of its fortifications, their weak points, so as to
  profit subsequently by his observations, in the event of being prevented
  from consummating his act of treason. He examined particularly the
  Bolchaia Gate, the one he wished to deliver up.
</p>
<p>
  Twice in the evening he came upon the glacis of this gate. He walked up
  and down, without fear of being discovered by the besiegers, whose nearest
  posts were at least a mile from the ramparts. He fancied that he was
  recognized by no one, till he caught sight of a shadow gliding along
  outside the earthworks. Sangarre had come at the risk of her life for the
  purpose of putting herself in communication with Ivan Ogareff.
</p>
<p>
  For two days the besieged had enjoyed a tranquillity to which the Tartars
  had not accustomed them since the commencement of the investment. This was
  by Ogareff’s orders. Feofar-Khan’s lieutenant wished that all attempts to
  take the town by force should be suspended. He hoped the watchfulness of
  the besieged would relax. At any rate, several thousand Tartars were kept
  in readiness at the outposts, to attack the gate, deserted, as Ogareff
  anticipated that it would be, by its defenders, whenever he should summon
  the besiegers to the assault.
</p>
<p>
  This he could not now delay in doing. All must be over by the time that
  the Russian troops should come in sight of Irkutsk. Ogareff’s arrangements
  were made, and on this evening a note fell from the top of the earthworks
  into Sangarre’s hands.
</p>
<p>
  On the next day, that is to say during the hours of darkness from the 5th
  to the 6th of October, at two o’clock in the morning, Ivan Ogareff had
  resolved to deliver up Irkutsk.
</p>
<p>
  <a name="link2HCH0031" id="link2HCH0031">
  <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
