<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
  CHAPTER XV CONCLUSION
</h2>
<p>
  MICHAEL STROGOFF was not, had never been, blind. A purely human
  phenomenon, at the same time moral and physical, had neutralized the
  action of the incandescent blade which Feofar’s executioner had passed
  before his eyes.
</p>
<p>
  It may be remembered, that at the moment of the execution, Marfa Strogoff
  was present, stretching out her hands towards her son. Michael gazed at
  her as a son would gaze at his mother, when it is for the last time. The
  tears, which his pride in vain endeavored to subdue, welling up from his
  heart, gathered under his eyelids, and volatiliz-ing on the cornea, had
  saved his sight. The vapor formed by his tears interposing between the
  glowing saber and his eyeballs, had been sufficient to annihilate the
  action of the heat. A similar effect is produced, when a workman smelter,
  after dipping his hand in vapor, can with impunity hold it over a stream
  of melted iron.
</p>
<p>
  Michael had immediately understood the danger in which he would be placed
  should he make known his secret to anyone. He at once saw, on the other
  hand, that he might make use of his supposed blindness for the
  accomplishment of his designs. Because it was believed that he was blind,
  he would be allowed to go free. He must therefore be blind, blind to all,
  even to Nadia, blind everywhere, and not a gesture at any moment must let
  the truth be suspected. His resolution was taken. He must risk his life
  even to afford to all he might meet the proof of his want of sight. We
  know how perfectly he acted the part he had determined on.
</p>
<p>
  His mother alone knew the truth, and he had whispered it to her in Tomsk
  itself, when bending over her in the dark he covered her with kisses.
</p>
<p>
  When Ogareff had in his cruel irony held the Imperial letter before the
  eyes which he believed were destroyed, Michael had been able to read, and
  had read the letter which disclosed the odious plans of the traitor. This
  was the reason of the wonderful resolution he exhibited during the second
  part of his journey. This was the reason of his unalterable longing to
  reach Irkutsk, so as to perform his mission by word of mouth. He knew that
  the town would be betrayed! He knew that the life of the Grand Duke was
  threatened! The safety of the Czar’s brother and of Siberia was in his
  hands.
</p>
<p>
  This story was told in a few words to the Grand Duke, and Michael repeated
  also—and with what emotion!—the part Nadia had taken in these
  events.
</p>
<p>
  “Who is this girl?” asked the Grand Duke.
</p>
<p>
  “The daughter of the exile, Wassili Fedor,” replied Michael.
</p>
<p>
  “The daughter of Captain Fedor,” said the Grand Duke, “has ceased to be
  the daughter of an exile. There are no longer exiles in Irkutsk.”
 </p>
<p>
  Nadia, less strong in joy than she had been in grief, fell on her knees
  before the Grand Duke, who raised her with one hand, while he extended the
  other to Michael.
</p>
<p>
  An hour after, Nadia was in her father’s arms. Michael Strogoff, Nadia,
  and Wassili Fedor were united. This was the height of happiness to them
  all.
</p>
<p>
  The Tartars had been repulsed in their double attack on the town. Wassili
  Fedor, with his little band, had driven back the first assailants who
  presented themselves at the Bolchaia Gate, expecting to find it open and
  which, by an instinctive feeling, often arising from sound judgment, he
  had determined to remain at and defend.
</p>
<p>
  At the same time as the Tartars were driven back the besieged had mastered
  the fire. The liquid naphtha having rapidly burnt to the surface of the
  water, the flames did not go beyond the houses on the shore, and left the
  other quarters of the town uninjured. Before daybreak the troops of
  Feofar-Khan had retreated into their camp, leaving a large number of dead
  on and below the ramparts.
</p>
<p>
  Among the dead was the gypsy Sangarre, who had vainly endeavored to join
  Ivan Ogareff.
</p>
<p>
  For two days the besiegers attempted no fresh assault. They were
  discouraged by the death of Ogareff. This man was the mainspring of the
  invasion, and he alone, by his plots long since contrived, had had
  sufficient influence over the khans and their hordes to bring them to the
  conquest of Asiatic Russia.
</p>
<p>
  However, the defenders of Irkutsk kept on their guard, and the investment
  still continued; but on the 7th of October, at daybreak, cannon boomed out
  from the heights around Irkutsk. It was the succoring army under the
  command of General Kisselef, and it was thus that he made known his
  welcome arrival to the Grand Duke.
</p>
<p>
  The Tartars did not wait to be attacked. Not daring to run the risk of a
  battle under the walls of Irkutsk, they immediately broke up the Angara
  camp. Irkutsk was at last relieved.
</p>
<p>
  With the first Russian soldiers, two of Michael’s friends entered the
  city. They were the inseparable Blount and Jolivet. On gaining the right
  bank of the Angara by means of the icy barrier, they had escaped, as had
  the other fugitives, before the flames had reached their raft. This had
  been noted by Alcide Jolivet in his book in this way: “Ran a narrow chance
  of being finished up like a lemon in a bowl of punch!”
 </p>
<p>
  Their joy was great on finding Nadia and Michael safe and sound; above
  all, when they learnt that their brave companion was not blind. Harry
  Blount inscribed this observation: “Red-hot iron is insufficient in some
  cases to destroy the sensibility of the optic nerve.”
 </p>
<p>
  Then the two correspondents, settled for a time in Irkutsk, busied
  themselves in putting the notes and impressions of their journey in order.
  Thence were sent to London and Paris two interesting articles relative to
  the Tartar invasion, and which—a rare thing—did not contradict
  each other even on the least important points.
</p>
<p>
  The remainder of the campaign was unfortunate to the Emir and his allies.
  This invasion, futile as all which attack the Russian Colossus must be,
  was very fatal to them. They soon found themselves cut off by the Czar’s
  troops, who retook in succession all the conquered towns. Besides this,
  the winter was terrible, and, decimated by the cold, only a small part of
  these hordes returned to the steppes of Tartary.
</p>
<p>
  The Irkutsk road, by way of the Ural Mountains, was now open. The Grand
  Duke was anxious to return to Moscow, but he delayed his journey to be
  present at a touching ceremony, which took place a few days after the
  entry of the Russian troops.
</p>
<p>
  Michael Strogoff sought Nadia, and in her father’s presence said to her,
  “Nadia, my sister still, when you left Riga to come to Irkutsk, did you
  leave it with any other regret than that for your mother?”
 </p>
<p>
  “No,” replied Nadia, “none of any sort whatever.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Then, nothing of your heart remains there?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Nothing, brother.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Then, Nadia,” said Michael, “I think that God, in allowing us to meet,
  and to go through so many severe trials together, must have meant us to be
  united forever.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Ah!” said Nadia, falling into Michael’s arms. Then turning towards
  Wassili Fedor, “My father,” said she, blushing.
</p>
<p>
  “Nadia,” said Captain Fedor, “it will be my joy to call you both my
  children!”
 </p>
<p>
  The marriage ceremony took place in Irkutsk cathedral.
</p>
<p>
  Jolivet and Blount very naturally assisted at this marriage, of which they
  wished to give an account to their readers.
</p>
<p>
  “And doesn’t it make you wish to imitate them?” asked Alcide of his
  friend.
</p>
<p>
  “Pooh!” said Blount. “Now if I had a cousin like you—”
 </p>
<p>
  “My cousin isn’t to be married!” answered Alcide, laughing.
</p>
<p>
  “So much the better,” returned Blount, “for they speak of difficulties
  arising between London and Pekin. Have you no wish to go and see what is
  going on there?”
 </p>
<p>
  “By Jove, my dear Blount!” exclaimed Alcide Jolivet, “I was just going to
  make the same proposal to you.”
 </p>
<p>
  And that was how the two inseparables set off for China.
</p>
<p>
  A few days after the ceremony, Michael and Nadia Strogoff, accompanied by
  Wassili Fedor, took the route to Europe. The road so full of suffering
  when going, was a road of joy in returning. They traveled swiftly, in one
  of those sleighs which glide like an express train across the frozen
  steppes of Siberia.
</p>
<p>
  However, when they reached the banks of the Dinka, just before Birskoe,
  they stopped for a while. Michael found the place where he had buried poor
  Nicholas. A cross was erected there, and Nadia prayed a last time on the
  grave of the humble and heroic friend, whom neither of them would ever
  forget.
</p>
<p>
  At Omsk, old Marfa awaited them in the little house of the Strogoffs. She
  clasped passionately in her arms the girl whom in her heart she had
  already a hundred times called “daughter.” The brave old Siberian, on that
  day, had the right to recognize her son and say she was proud of him.
</p>
<p>
  After a few days passed at Omsk, Michael and Nadia entered Europe, and,
  Wassili Fedor settling down in St. Petersburg, neither his son nor his
  daughter had any occasion to leave him, except to go and see their old
  mother.
</p>
<p>
  The young courier was received by the Czar, who attached him specially to
  his own person, and gave him the Cross of St. George. In the course of
  time, Michael Strogoff reached a high station in the Empire. But it is not
  the history of his success, but the history of his trials, which deserves
  to be related.
</p>
<p>
  <br /><br /><br /><br />
</p>

</body>
</html>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
